---
layout: default
title: FTDI I2C adapter
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
tags: usb linux-kernel ftdi i2c
---

[FTDI MPSSE]: https://www.ftdichip.com/Products/Cables/USBMPSSE.htm "FTDI MPSSE"
[Nintendo Wiichuk]: https://www.olimex.com/Products/Modules/Sensors/MOD-WII/MOD-Wii-UEXT-NUNCHUCK/open-source-hardware "Nintendo Wiichuk"
[BeagleBone Black Wireless]: https://beagleboard.org/black-wireless "BeagleBone Black Wireless"

In the previous post I covered what USB data transfers we need to configure the
[FTDI MPSSE] cable to work in the MPSSE mode. Now with this knowledge we can
continue working on the USB-to-I2C bridge for the kernel.

All the sources used in this article are available on
[GitHub.](https://github.com/krinkinmu/bootlin)

<!--more-->

# Probing

In [one of the previous posts]({% post_url 2020-08-02-ftdi %}) we covered a
skeleton of the USB driver that did nothing, but detected that the device was
connected. USB susbsystem used the generic interface that all the USB devices
conform to to figure out what Vendor and Product IDs the newly connected device
has and based on that found the right driver to call.

Inside the probing function of the driver we basically just logged some
messages, but other than that we didn't really do anything. Normally, in the
probe function we should initialize the device, create and initialize all the
bookkeeping data structures we need for the driver.

## Driver Data

Let's start from introducing the bookkeeping datastructure for the driver:

```c
struct ftdi_usb {
	struct usb_device *udev;
	struct usb_interface *interface;
	u8 *buffer;
	size_t buffer_size;
	struct i2c_adapter adapter;
	int io_timeout;
	unsigned freq;
};
```

There are quite a few fields there, so let's discuss them a little bit starting
from the simplest. `buffer` and `buffer_size` represent an helper data buffer.
This buffer will be used to accumulate MPSSE commands before sending them to the
device, as well as, an intermediate buffer for receiving the data from the
device.

The reason why we need an intermediate buffer when receiving the data is because
as outlined in the [previous post]({% post_url 2020-09-05-ftdi-protocol %}) the
first two bytes of the returned data will store some kind of status that we need
to discard.

We will allocate the helper buffer once and then will reuse it for all kinds
of IO operations multiple times.

The next relatively simple to understand field is `io_timeout`. It's just the
timeout for the USB data trnasfers in milliseconds.

The last simple to understand field is `freq`. It's the desired frequency of the
I2C bus. I2C master decides the frequency of the bus as the master is the one
that controls the clock. Typical frequency for the I2C devices is 100kHZ.

> *NOTE:* The frequency doesn't have to be accurate due to the way the I2C
  protocol was designed. Probably, the biggest problem with using a too high
  frequency is that it might not give the slave device enough time to respond.
  Normally, I2C master would support a feature called clock stretching that
  would help to mitigate this issue somewhat, but [FTDI MPSSE] cable I have
  does not officially support this feature.

`udev` and `interface` are pointers to the Linux Kernel internal structures
representing the device and the interface the driver binds to. To execute data
transfers we need the pointer to the USB device (`udev`), that's why we save it
in our strtucture. The `interface` field is not really needed. So we can
probably just keep just one of them.

> *NOTE:* `usb_device` pointer can be obtained from the `usb_interface` pointer
  using the `interface_to_usbdev` function.

One important note about `udev` and `interface` fields is that they point to
reference counted structures. So if we want to keep those pointers around we
have to increment the reference counters for them. In order to do that we can
use `usb_get_dev` and `usb_get_intf` functions.

Similarly, in our disconnect function we have to decrement the reference
counters for both structures. The function that do that are called `usb_put_dev`
and `usb_put_intf`.

Finally, the `adapter` field is an instance of [i2c_adapter structure](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.9-rc3/source/include/linux/i2c.h#L695). This
structure contains pointers to functions that impelement I2C related functions,
like the actual data transfers. That's the structure that I2C controllers need
to register in the kernel. I'll touch on how to initialize this structure later
in this post.

Describing the driver data structure took a lot of words, but all operations of
the driver will be centered around the access to this data structure, so it was
important to cover it.

## Initialiing the device

Besides creating the data structure for the device we also need to configure the
device and put it in MPSSE mode. From the
[previous post]({% post_url 2020-09-05-ftdi-protocol %}) we know what USB data
transfers are needed to initialize the device, here we will cover how to do
those in Linux Kernel.

In Linux Kernel all USB communications are centered around the
[urb structure](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.9-rc3/source/include/linux/usb.h#L1561).
Normally, drivers to initiate a transfer would need to fill in this structure
and submit it to the host controller driver, that will handle the trasfer and
when it's complete call the device driver back.

In our case however all we need is a simple syncrhonous communication interface.
In such cases we don't need to work with the `urb` structure directly or use
callbacks. To start a control data transfer we can use `usb_control_msg`
function and to start a bulk data transfer we can use `usb_bulk_msg` function.
Those function in internally create the `urb`, submit it and wait until the
transfer is complete.

For example, to do a device reset we need to do three control transfers. Here is
how the code that does it might look:

```c
static int ftdi_reset(struct ftdi_usb *ftdi)
{
	int ret;

	ret = usb_control_msg(
		ftdi->udev, usb_sndctrlpipe(ftdi->udev, 0),
		/* bRequest = */0x00,
		/* bRequestType = */0x40,
		/* wValue = */0x0000,
		/* wIndex = */0x0000,
		/* data = */NULL,
		/* size = */0,
		ftdi->io_timeout);
	if (ret < 0)
		return ret;

	ret = usb_control_msg(
		ftdi->udev, usb_sndctrlpipe(ftdi->udev, 0),
		/* bRequest = */0x00,
		/* bRequestType = */0x40,
		/* wValue = */0x00001,
		/* wIndex = */0x0000,
		/* data = */NULL,
		/* size = */0,
		ftdi->io_timeout);
	if (ret < 0)
		return ret;

	return usb_control_msg(
		ftdi->udev, usb_sndctrlpipe(ftdi->udev, 0),
		/* bRequest = */0x00,
		/* bRequestType = */0x40,
		/* wValue = */0x0002,
		/* wIndex = */0x0000,
		/* data = */NULL,
		/* size = */0,
		ftdi->io_timeout);
}
```

Most of the parameters are easy to understand. `bRequest`, `bRequestType`,
`wValue` and `wIndex` are generic for all the USB control transfers. `data` and
`size` allow to add additional payload, which we don't need for our use case.
`ftdi->io_timeout` is more or less self explanatory.

Other than those we need to specify the device and the endpoint on the device
we want to communicate with. `ftdi->udev` and `usb_sndctrlpipe(ftdi->udev, 0)`
are responsible for that.

`usb_sndctrlpipe` function is interesting, so let's take a look a little bit at
its name. First of all the `pipe` part means the endpoint, so those terms are
basically synonims. `snd` part means that we are initiating a write transfer. In
other words we want to send some data to the device. Finally, the `ctrl` part
says that we want to do a control transfer.

The arguments of `usb_sndctrlpipe` function are the device pointer and the index
of the endpoint/pipe. We got the right index from the USB snooping logs in the
[previous post]({% post_url 2020-09-05-ftdi-protocol %}).

There is a similar function that could be used for bulk data transfers. For
example if we want to start a bulk write data transfer to the endpoint/pipe
number two, we'd use `usb_sndbulkpipe(ftdi->udev, 2)` function.

Let's look at how we can do bulk read and write data transfers to our device.
In our case of we need to send write bulk transfers to the endpoint/pipe number
two and read bulk data transfers to the endpoint/pipe number one to communciate
with the MPSSE:

```c
static int ftdi_mpsse_write(
	struct ftdi_usb *ftdi, u8 *data, size_t size, size_t *written)
{
	int actual_length;
	int ret;

	ret = usb_bulk_msg(
		ftdi->udev, usb_sndbulkpipe(ftdi->udev, 2),
		/* data = */data,
		/* len = */size,
		/* actual_length = */&actual_length,
		ftdi->io_timeout);
	*written = actual_length;
	return ret;
}

static int ftdi_mpsse_read(
	struct ftdi_usb *ftdi, u8 *data, size_t size, size_t *read)
{
	int actual_length;
	int ret;

	ret = usb_bulk_msg(
		ftdi->udev, usb_sbdbulkpipe(ftdi->udev, 2),
		/* data = */data,
		/* len = */size,
		/* actual_length = */&actual_length,
		ftdi->io_timeout);
	*read = actual_length;
	return ret;
}
```

You may notice that in the example above we use `usb_bulk_msg` instead of
`usb_control_msg` since we want to do a bulk data transfer. Bulk data transfers
require just plain data and don't have prescribed parameters as control data
transfers (no `bRequest`, `bRequestType`, 'wValue' and `wIndex`).

> *NOTE:* at this point even if you're not familiar with USB specificaltion it's
  not really hard to roughly figure out what a different kinds of USB data
  transfers are used for. That being said, we only touched on two simplest to
  understand data transfers in the USB specification.

Described control and bulk data structure are enough to implement all the
functionality we need. I will not provide the complete code of the probe
function, as it's available on [GitHub.](https://github.com/krinkinmu/bootlin)

# I2C Controller Interface

Since we want the [FTDI MPSSE] cable to act as an I2C controller we need to
initialize and register with the kernel an instance of
[i2c_adapter structure](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.9-rc3/source/include/linux/i2c.h#L695).

There are a few fileds in that structure that we need to initialize. The actual
implementation of the I2C is described by
[i2c_algorithm structure.](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.9-rc3/source/include/linux/i2c.h#L519)
`i2c_adapter` `algo` fields must store a pointer to a valid `i2c_algorithm`.
It's our responsibility to create the `i2c_algorithm` instance and store the
pointer in the `i2c_adapter` structure.

Here is how the `i2c_algorithm` structure looks in my case:

```c
static const struct i2c_algorithm ftdi_usb_i2c_algo = {
	.master_xfer = ftdi_usb_i2c_xfer,
	.functionality = ftdi_usb_i2c_func,
};
```

The `master_xfer` field should point to the function that actually implements
data transfers. In our case it's the function that will talk to the [FTDI MPSSE]
cable to do I2C data transfers.

The signature of the function is defined as follows:

```c
static int ftdi_usb_i2c_xfer(struct i2c_adapter *adapter,
			     struct i2c_msg *msg, int num);
```

The `adapter` paramter is the `i2c_adapter` structure that we register with the
kernel. `msg` and `num` describe a sequence of actual data transfers that we
need to perform.

One question that may arise here is how can we get the `ftdi_usb` to request the
USB data transfers as described above. The `i2c_adapter` structure contains a
`void *` field called `algo_data` specifically for that puporse. When we
initialize `i2c_adapter` structure we can write any data we want into that
field to be used later. Specifically, we can write the a pointer to `ftdi_usb`
structure and then use it:

```c
static int ftdi_usb_i2c_xfer(struct i2c_adapter *adapter,
			     struct i2c_msg *msg, int num)
{
	struct ftdi_usb *ftdi = (struct ftdi_usb *)adapter->algo_data;

	/* the rest of the implementation can use ftdi pointer */
}
```

The `functionality` file should point to function returning supported features
of the I2C controller. In our case we support only plain I2C data transfers, so
the function returns just `I2C_FUNC_I2C` constant defined by the Linux Kernel.

Besides the fields relevant for the actual I2C implementation there are a few
other fields inside `i2c_adapter` that we need to initialize. One of them is
`owner` field. This field is used for reference counting when work with modules.
If your kernel module registered a structure with the kernel, you don't want to
allow the module to be unloaded before the structure was unregistered. The
`owner` field should be initialized using `THIS_MODULE` macro, to prevent
unloading the module.

Finally, all the devices inside Linux Kernel are supposed to have an associated
[device structure](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.9-rc3/source/include/linux/device.h#L514).
That's why `i2c_adapter` has the `device` structure embedded in it. Devices are
linked together in a form of a tree or forest. For example, roughly a USB device
has a USB bus as a parent, a USB bus might have a PCI bus as a parent, etc. This
way, when the parent device goes away, kernel will also know to disconnect all
the children of the parent. In case of I2C adapter we need to tell the kernel
what device is the parent as it has no means to figure it out on its own.

Despite the long explanation, the complete initialization code would look rather
simple:

```c
ftdi->adapter.owner = THIS_MODULE;
ftdi->adapter.algo = &ftdi_usb_i2c_algo;
ftdi->adapter.algo_data = ftdi;
ftdi->adapter.dev.parent = &interface->dev;
snptrinf(ftdi->adapter.name, sizeof(ftdi->adapter.name),
	 "FTDI USB-to-I2C at bus %03d device %03d",
	 dev->bus->busnum, dev->devnum);
```

To register the initialized I2C adapter structure with the kernel all we need is
to call `i2c_add_adapter` function. To unregister the registered adapter we need
to call `i2c_del_adapter`.

I put the I2C adapter initialization and registration inside the USB probe
function. Unregistration happens in the USB disconnect callback.

# Error handling

One final question worth considering is what to do with the device when an error
happens? The answer to this question would depend on the device and the type of
the error. In my case since I don't have the complete specification, it's hard
to device a smart error handling strategy. As a result I went with a relatively
simple one.

USB probe function of the driver resets the device and then initializes it to
use use MPSSE mode of operation. I made an assumption that this reset and
initialize sequence should be able to return the device into a working state if
something happens. Similarly to the way it sets the device into the working
state once it's connected.

The the error handling strategy I adopted was to propagate any IO errors to the
caller, but before returning the error I'm trying to reset the device in hope
that it will make the subsequent IO operations succeed.

# Testing

In previous posts I covered an input device driver for [Nintendo Wiichuk]
controller. The driver was tested on [BeagleBone Black Wireless] board. The
driver itself however is not board or architecture specific, so we can reuse it.

One question is how can we tell the kernel that we connected an I2C device? I2C
bus does not provide capablities for device enumeration, like, for example, USB
does. With [BeagleBone Black Wireless] we added the [Nintendo Wiichuk] node to
the device tree that kernel parsed, however not all platforms use device tree.

On laptops, we generally have plenty of I2C controllers:

```sh
$ ls /sys/bus/i2c/devices/
i2c-0  i2c-1  i2c-2  i2c-3  i2c-4  i2c-5  i2c-6  i2c-7 i2c-8  i2c-DELL07E6:00
```

Those are likely hardcoded in the kernel. Say if you have a laptop or a mother
board from a particular vendor, that vendor may have contributed a platform
driver to the Linux Kernel. That platform driver would know what I2C devices
are supposed to be attached to it, so they have an option to hardcode the list
of devices.

For the USB-to-I2C controller it doesn't make terribly a lot of sense, since
it's kind of the point that we can connect anything to it. Fortunately enough,
there is another mechanism you can use to manually instantiate a I2C device.

For example, my FTDI-based I2C controller shows up in the list of I2C devices
(when the driver is loaded) under the name `i2c-8`.

> *NOTE:* I don't think that `i2c-8` is always guaranteed to be the name, it's
  just happens in my system that it's always the case. In general you can try
  to plug and unplug the cable to see what I2C device would appear/disappear
  from the list. Alternatively, you can just read the `name` file and see what
  it contains.

I can trigger instantion of I2C device attached to the controller in the
following way:

```sh
echo wiichuk_i2c 0x52 > /sys/bus/i2c/devices/new_device
```

For this command to work I need a driver for the [Nintendo Wiichuk] to be
loaded. The `wiichuk_i2c` part helps kernel to find the right driver for the
device. `wiichuk_i2c` is the name recorded in the `i2c_device_id` structure in
my case. The `0x52` part is just the I2C address of the device. Similarly, I can
delete the device by writing `0x52` to the `delete_device` file.

# Instead of conclusion

Finally I managed to make the platform and architecture independent device
driver for [Nintendo Wiichuk] controller work on my laptop. Looking back at the
whole path I can say, that I2C does not seem like a good option for
pluggable/unpluggable devices as it lacks enumeration capabilities (though it's
likely cheaper if you consider USB licensing fees).

Aside from that, it doesn't seem like using an [FTDI MPSSE] cable was a
particularly wise choise economically speaking. The cable and delivery was
pretty expensive, plus the amount of work required to make it do what I want is
too much.

It was a fun educational exercise, but for anybody who just needs an I2C
controller I'd recommend to buy a ready solution.
