---
layout: post
title: UEFI on AARCH64
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
tags: efi clang microsoft aarch64 hikey960
---

[UEFI Specification]: https://uefi.org/sites/default/files/resources/UEFI%20Spec%202.8B%20May%202020.pdf "UEFI Specification"
[previous post]: {% post_url 2020-11-15-loading-elf-image %} "the previous post"
[EFI getting started]: {% post_url 2020-10-11-efi-getting-started %} "EFI getting started"
[HiKey960]: https://www.96boards.org/product/hikey960/ "HiKey960"

In the [previous post] we covered how an EFI application can load another binary
in memory. That's basically what a bootloader does. In this short post I will
show that basically the same code will work on a different architecture.

As usual all the sources are available on
[GitHub](https://github.com/krinkinmu/efi).

<!--more-->

# The Board

[UEFI Specification] supports multiple different architectures, including
`aarch64`. `aarch64` is basically a 64-bit version of `ARM` architecture.

It appears that in the `ARM` ecosystem there is quite a variety of differnt
turn-up methods and approaches, so there is no guarantees that a particular
board firmware implements [UEFI Specification].

I happened to have a board that does have a version of firmware implementing the
[UEFI Specification] - [HiKey960]. Given that I have this board, I though that
it might be curious to see if the same code I have will work for `aarch64`.

I will not cover the board in any depth here. That being said, I had this board
for quite a while, so I wasn't sure if it's still working of if it has the
reasonably new version of the firmware.

Here are a few links that helped me to update the firmware and bring up the
board:

1. board recovery instructions are available [here](https://www.96boards.org/documentation/consumer/hikey/hikey960/installation/board-recovery.md.html)
2. instructions to setup `ser2net` to connect to the device console are availbe
   [here](https://github.com/96boards-hikey/tools-images-hikey960/blob/master/README-flash-uefi.md)
3. instructions to install `Debian` on the board are [here](https://wiki.debian.org/InstallingDebianOn/96Boards/HiKey960).

Those instructions overlap significantly, but somehow none of them is complete.
From now on I assume that the board has the latest UEFI firmware and by default
starts `GRUB` and boots into `Debian` when you switch the board on.

# UEFI Shell

[HiKey960] has internal storage where all the firmware, `Debian` image and root
filesystem live. As normal for UEFI firmware on this internal storage we also
have a `FAT`-formatted partition.

You can explore this `FAT` partition if you boot the board into `Debian`:

```sh
root@linaro-developer:~# cat /etc/fstab | grep /boot/efi
UUID=6D97-E8F4	/boot/efi	vfat	rw,nofail	0	2

root@linaro-developer:~# ls -l /boot/efi/EFI/BOOT
total 816
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root 120832 Jul 20  2020 BOOTAA64.EFI
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root 702464 Jul 20  2020 GRUBAA64.EFI
```

As you can see one of the binaries in the partition is the `GRUB` itself. I
suspect that it's a regular `EFI` binary just like the one I built, though with
quite a bit more functionality.

If you want to prevent the board from booting into `GRUB` right away by default
you can just rename those two binaries:

```sh
root@linaro-developer:~# mv /boot/efi/EFI/BOOT/GRUBAA64.EFI /boot/efi/EFI/BOOT/GRUBAA64.EFI.old
root@linaro-developer:~# mv /boot/efi/EFI/BOOT/BOOTAA64.EFI /boot/efi/EFI/BOOT/BOOTAA64.EFI.old
```

If you do that the firmware would not find the expected `GRUB` binary to load
and will fail to load the system. In my case when it happens the I see the
following prompt:

```sh
Press RETURN or SPACE key to quit.
```

When I press `ENTER` the board shows some kind of a `BIOS`-like firmware `UI`.
In that UI you can select the `Boot Manager` item in the menu and then
`UEFI Shell` to start the shell.

In the [EFI getting started] post I covered how to load and exectue a binary
from `UEFI Shell`. There is one caveat though, the binaries were not built yet
for the `aarch64` and we didn't store them into the internal storage of the
board.

# Building for ARM

With `GCC` toolchain to cross-compile a binary for a different architecture we'd
need to download or build a toolchain for the target platform. `LLVM`-based
toolchain might actually have a built-in support for multiple architectures, so
all it takes to cross-compile is to specify the target platform.

Here is the complete `Makefile` content that works for me:

```make
CC := clang
LD := lld
CFLAGS := \
	-ffreestanding -MMD -mno-red-zone -std=c11 \
	-target aarch64-unknown-windows -Wall -Werror -pedantic
LDFLAGS := -flavor link -subsystem:efi_application -entry:efi_main

KERNEL_CFLAGS := \
	-ffreestanding -MMD -mno-red-zone -std=c11 \
	-target aarch64-unknown-gnu -Wall -Werror -pedantic
KERNEL_LDFLAGS := \
	-flavor ld -e main

SRCS := main.c clib.c kernel.c

default: all

%.o: %.c
	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c $< -o $@

boot.efi: clib.o main.o
	$(LD) $(LDFLAGS) $^ -out:$@

kernel.elf: kernel.c
	$(CC) $(KERNEL_CFLAGS) -c $< -o kernel.o
	$(LD) $(KERNEL_LDFLAGS) kernel.o -o $@

-include $(SRCS:.c=.d)

.PHONY: clean all default

all: boot.efi kernel.elf

clean:
	rm -rf *.efi *.elf *.o *.d *.lib
```

You might notice that this `Makefile` is quite similar to the one in
[EFI getting started] post. The only important difference is the `-target`
parameter.

The `-target` flag for the EFI binary now contains `aarch64-unknown-windows`.
And the `-target` flag for the ELF binary now contains `aarch64-unknown-gnu`.
So all it took in this case is it to tell `clang` the target architecture. In
general the flags between different architectures might not really match.

For example, I was surprised to find out that `-mno-red-zone` option works for
`aarch64` architecture. Even though red zone describes a relatively generic
optimization that makes sense for different architectures, it was surprising to
find out that a similar optimization for `aarch64` is also named red zone.

> *NOTE:* the version of the `Makefile` in the repository is slightly more
  generic and supports building for both `x86-64` and `aarch64`, so it's
  different from the code in the post.

If we try to build the code now it will fail in the following way:

```sh
clang -ffreestanding -MMD -mno-red-zone -std=c11 -target aarch64-unknown-windows -Wall -Werror -pedantic -c main.c -o main.o
main.c:457:22: error: 'sysv_abi' calling convention is not supported for this target [-Werror,-Wignored-attributes]
        int (__attribute__((sysv_abi)) *entry)(void);
                            ^
main.c:465:31: error: 'sysv_abi' calling convention is not supported for this target [-Werror,-Wignored-attributes]
        entry = (int (__attribute__((sysv_abi)) *)(void))elf->image_entry;
                                     ^
2 errors generated.
make: *** [Makefile:18: main.o] Error 1
```

In the `main.c` when I'm calling into the code just loaded from an ELF file I
have to specify a calling convention explicitly. That's because on `x86-64` UEFI
calling convention doesn't match the calling convention used by the code in the
ELF binary.

However, when compiling for `aarch64` the `sysv_abi` attribute is not supported.
Fortunately enough it appears that calling conventions for `aarch64` do not
diverge as much, so we don't really need to explicitly tell compiler to use a
different calling convention and that part of the code might be deleted.

The way I handled it in the repository is that I introduce a file with compiler
specific magic, macroses, etc. I called this file `compiler.h` and defined there
`ELFABI` macro in the following way:

```c
#ifndef __COMPILER_H__
#define __COMPILER_H__

#ifdef __x86_64__
#define ELFABI __attribute__((sysv_abi))
#else
#define ELFABI
#endif

#endif  // __COMPILER_H__
```

So now where I need to explicitly specify the calling convention I can just use
`ELFABI` macro. After this change I managed to get the two binaries:

* `boot.efi` - the `EFI` binary
* `kernel.efl` - the `ELF` binary.

# Copying to the Board

There are a few ways to make the newly built binaries accesible on the board.
One simple way is to use an `micro SD` card.

You can just rename `GRUBAA64.EFI.old` and `BOOTAA64.EFI.old` to their original
names (`GRUBAA64.EFI` and `BOOTAA64.EFI`) using `UEFI Shell` command `mv` and
boot into `Debian`. Alternatively, you can just load `GRUBAA64.EFI.old` directly
from the `UEFI Shell` without renaming.

In `Debian` you can insert the `micro SD` card into the slot on the board and
mount it. Depending on how the `micro SD` card was formatted the commands to do
that might look something like this:

```sh
root@linaro-developer:~# cd /mnt/
root@linaro-developer:/mnt# mkdir boot
root@linaro-developer:/mnt# mount -t vfat /dev/mmcblk0p1 /mnt/boot
```

After that just copy the files from `/mnt/boot` to `/boot/efi/EFI/BOOT` where
the rest of the EFI binaries live:

```sh
root@linaro-developer:/mnt# cp boot/boot.efi /boot/efi/EFI/BOOT/boot.efi
root@linaro-developer:/mnt# cp boot/kernel.elf /boot/efi/EFI/BOOT/kernel
```

> *NOTE:* it doesn't matter how we call the EFI binary since we explicitly call
  it by name in the `UEFI Shell`, but the path to the ELF binary is hardcoded
  in the EFI binary, so it must live in `efi/boot/kernel`.

`UEFI` firmware actually also recognizes `micro SD` card if it's in the slot.
So instead of booting into `Debian` you can just copy the files using the
`UEFI Shell`.

Now when all the files are in place refer to the [EFI getting started] post
for actually running the binary.

# Bonus: testing in QEMU

If you don't have an `aarch64` board (or even if you do, but working with the
actual hardware is too bothersome) you can use `QEMU`. First you need to
download `aarch64` EFI firmware for `QEMU`:

```sh
sudo apt-get install qemu-efi-aarch64
```

This package contains the `aarch64` EFI image for `QEMU`. You can copy it into
the working directory:

```sh
cd ~/ws/efi
cp /usr/share/qemu-efi-aarch64/QEMU_EFI.fd OVMF_aarch64.fd
```

You can use this file in the same way as described in the [EFI getting started]
post, but with the `QEMU` emulating `aarch64`:

```sh
qemu-system-aarch64 -machine virt -cpu max \
	-drive if=pflash,format=raw,file=/home/kmu/ws/efi/OVMF_aarch64.fd \
	-drive format=raw,file=fat:rw:/home/kmu/ws/efi/root \
	-net none \
	-nographic
```

> *NOTE:* `/home/kmu/ws/efi` is the working directory on my computor, the path
  might be different on yours.

> *NOTE:* as in [EFI getting started] `root` is the root of the EFI file system,
  so all the files we want to be available in the virtual machine should be
  copied there.

> *NOTE:* for some reason I couldn't make it work without explicitly specifing
  `-cpu` option.

# Instead of conclusion

Rather suprisingly making it work on `ARM` turned out to be almost problem-free.
