---
layout: default
title: FTDI and USB device ID
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
tags: usb linux-kernel ftdi
---

[Nintendo Wiichuk]: https://www.olimex.com/Products/Modules/Sensors/MOD-WII/MOD-Wii-UEXT-NUNCHUCK/open-source-hardware "Nintendo Wiichuk"
[BeagleBone Black Wireless]: https://beagleboard.org/black-wireless "BeagleBone Black Wireless"
[I2C]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I%C2%B2C "I2C"
[USB]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/USB "USB"
[UART]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_asynchronous_receiver-transmitter "UART"
[FTDI MPSSE]: https://www.ftdichip.com/Products/Cables/USBMPSSE.htm "FTDI MPSSE"
[the datasheet]: https://www.ftdichip.com/Support/Documents/DataSheets/Cables/DS_C232HM_MPSSE_CABLE.pdf "FTDI datasheet"
[USB-IF]: https://usb.org "USB-IF"

In a few of the previous articles I was writing a driver for [Nintendo Wiichuk].
It was an [I2C] input device and the driver was tested on
[BeagleBone Black Wireless]. However there weren't a lot of opportunities for
me to use a joystick on the board, so the experience is somewhat incomplete.

The driver for [Nintendo Wiichuk] is not really architecture specific, so I
figured that if I was able to connect the joystick to my laptop it would be cool
to try it in a game on my laptop. The problem is that I don't have any exposed
[I2C] connectors, so I want to try to create an [USB] to [I2C] adapter. And this
article is the first step.

All the sources used in this article are available on
[GitHub.](https://github.com/krinkinmu/bootlin)

<!--more-->

# Hardware

First of all we need hardware capabale of converting [USB] commands into [I2C]
data transfers. Frankly speaking I didn't do a good job searching for a [USB]
to [I2C] bridge in the first place and that what started this effort.

The device I managed to find is an [FTDI MPSSE] cable that is theoretically
capable of serving as an [USB] to [I2C] bridge. The FTDI chips are often used
for [USB] to [UART] conversion in various hobby projects, however with a
different configuration and a bunch of additional excercises they should be able
to communicate with [I2C] devices as well.

> *NOTE:* ultimately the decision to use an FTDI based cable was not
  economically great one, as with the delivery and taxes it costed me almost
  70 pounds. Half of that cost was shipping for a tiny package.

# USB VID and PID

According to [the datasheet] the device uses USB Vendor ID *0x0403* and USB
Product ID *0x6014*. USB Vendor and Product ID are something of a unique
device id. This identifier is used to figure out what driver should manage a
particular device or even what kernel module to load once the system detected
a new device connected to the system.

If you connect an [FTDI MPSSE] cable to your Linux system you may notice that
the system automatically loads *ftdi_sio* module. It works because all [USB]
devices in addition to the device-specific functions they provide also conform
to a generic interface. Among other things the generic interface allows to
detect when a new device was connected to the [USB] bus and obtain some basic
information about the device (like VID and PID).

That means that you don't need a special driver for the device to detect that
a device was connected to the [USB] bus or figure out what device was connected.
Once the system knows that information it can figure out what driver can manage
the device looking at the *VID:PID* that drivers support.

As you probably could have guessed from the name, USB Vendor ID identifies a
manufacturer and the USB Product ID is used to identify a particular kind of
device that that vendor produces.

USB Vendor IDs are assigned by the central authoritiy: [USB-IF]. Getting USB
Vendor ID costs [quite a price](https://www.usb.org/getting-vendor-id) for an
individual developer, but it's probably not that much for an organization
capable of manufacturing devices.

In my experiments I'm going to just pick *0x0005:0x0001* as a *VID:PID* pair.
As far as I can tell this particular
[USB Vendor ID is not used yet](http://linux-usb.org/usb.ids) and that's enough
for experiments for now. However in order to do that we would need to override
the original FTDI *VID:PID*. Fortunately enough the FTDI cable I have allows to
do that.

Once we override the device id the *ftdi_sio* driver will not be loaded
automatically when we connect the device. That's exactly what we want, since
we will be working on a different driver for our FTDI device.

# FTDI drivers

FTDI distributes a library as well as *C* headers that can communicate with the
FTDI based devices from the user space. We will use this library to override
*VID:PID* for the cable. You can download the driver from the
[ftdichip.com](https://www.ftdichip.com/Drivers/D2XX.htm) and they even have a
video that shows how you can install the driver into your system. However I will
cover it here as well:

```sh
cd ~/ws
mkdir libftd2xx
cd libftd2xx
wget https://www.ftdichip.com/Drivers/D2XX/Linux/libftd2xx-x86_64-1.4.8.gz
tar -xvf libftd2xx-x86_64-1.4.8.gz
sudo cp release/build/libftd2xx.a /usr/local/lib
sudo cp release/build/libftd2xx.so.1.4.8 /usl/local/lib
sudo ln -s /usr/loca/lib/libftd2xx.so.1.4.8 /usr/local/lib/libftd2xx.so
sudo chmod 0644 /usr/loca/lib/libftd2xx.so.1.4.8
ldconfig
```

> *NOTE:* */usr/local/lib* works for libraries in *Ubuntu*, but in *Red Hat*
  based repositories */usr/local/lib* is not a directoy used by default for
  libraries and as a result building binaries there might require additional
  effort to pick up libraries from */usr/local/lib*.

Besides the libraries themselves we also need header files with declarations of
function and relevenat data structructures that we'd need to use the library:

```sh
cd ~/ws
mkdir -p bootlin/ftdi/usr
cp ~/ws/libftd2xx/release/ftd2xx.h bootlin/ftdi/usr
cp ~/ws/libftd2xx/release/WinTypes.h bootlin/ftdi/usr
chmod -x bootlin/ftdi/usr/ftd2xx.h
chmod -x bootlin/ftdi/usr/WinTypes.h
```

> *NOTE:* *~/ws/bootlin* is the place where I stored the [I2C] driver for the
  [Nintendo Wiichuk] device, so I decided to use it for the [USB] to [I2C]
  driver related things. *~/ws/bootlin/ftdi/usr* would be the directory for all
  the userspace tools.

> *NOTE:* I'm not sure why but *ftd2xx.h* and *WinTypes.h* files had execute
  bit set and they should not be executable, so I removed the execute bit for
  them along the way.

# Overriding VID and PID

Now when we have the FTDI libraries installed we'll start by writing a tool to
enumerate the connected FTDI devices. We will use this tool to find serial
numbers of the connected devices. The FTDI library allows to communicate with
the device based on its serial number, so this tool will come in handy later to
find the serial number of our device.

The full list of available functions can be found in the
*D2XX Programmer's Guide* that can be obtained from
[ftdichip.com.](https://www.ftdichip.com/Support/Documents/ProgramGuides.htm)

Apparently there are multiple ways to use this API to obtain device serial
number, I'm going to use *FT_ListDevices* function. The first step would be
to figure out how many FTDI based devices are connected to the system:

```c
#include "ftd2xx.h"

static int devices(int *devices)
{
	FT_STATUS status;
	DWORD n;

	status = FT_ListDevices(&n, NULL, FT_LIST_NUMBER_ONLY);
	if (!FT_SUCCESS(status))
		return -1;
	*devices = n;
	return 0;
}
```

> *NOTE:* the FTDI library uses a somewhat questionable interface. They overuse
  *void* pointers instead of proper types. The meaning of *void* pointers
  depends on the combination of flags passed to the function. So it's a mess.

This function will tell us how many FTDI devices are connected to the system.
Later we can get information about a particular device based on the index of the
device like this:

```c
struct serial {
	char serial[16];
};

static int device_serial(int index, struct serial *serial)
{
	FT_STATUS status;

	status = FT_ListDevices(
		(void *)((unsigned long)index),
		serial->serial,
		FT_LIST_BY_INDEX | FT_OPEN_BY_SERIAL_NUMBER);
	if (!FT_SUCCESS(status))
		return -1;
	return 0;
}
```

The rest of the logic boils down to just enumerating serial numbers of all the
devices connected to the system.

> *NOTE:* before running this tool make sure to remove the *ftdi_sio* and
  *usbserial* modules using *rmmod* command, so that they don't interfere with
  the tools.

Running this tool I figured that the serial number for the FTDI cable I have
was *FT3ELPXS*.

Actually we didn't need to create this tool, there is already a generic tool
available that allows to get the serial number of connected USB devices:

```sh
sudo lsusb -v
```

In the output of the *lsusb* command you could find something like this for the
connected FTDI devices:

```
Bus 001 Device 019: ID 0005:0001  
Device Descriptor:
  bLength                18
  bDescriptorType         1
  bcdUSB               2.00
  bDeviceClass            0 (Defined at Interface level)
  bDeviceSubClass         0 
  bDeviceProtocol         0 
  bMaxPacketSize0        64
  idVendor           0x0005 
  idProduct          0x0001 
  bcdDevice            9.00
  iManufacturer           1 FTDI
  iProduct                2 C232HM-DDHSL-0
  iSerial                 3 FT3ELPXS
  bNumConfigurations      1
```

One way or another we now know the serial number of the FTDI cable. The next
step would be to override the *VID:PID*. The high level logic of changing the
*VID:PID* is simple:

1. Open the device (using *FT_OpenEx* function)
2. Write *VID:PID* to the device EEPROM (using *FT_EE_Program* function)
3. Close the device (using *FT_Close* function).

We will start with the simple open and close operations:

```c
static int open_device(const char *serial, FT_HANDLE *handle)
{
	FT_STATUS status;

	status = FT_OpenEx((void *)serial, FT_OPEN_BY_SERIAL_NUMBER, handle);
	if (!FT_SUCCESS(status))
		return -1;
	return 0;
}

static int close_device(FT_HANDLE handle)
{
	FT_STATUS status;

	status = FT_Close(handle);
	if (!FT_SUCCESS(status))
		return -1;
	return 0;
}
```

In the code above *FT_HANDLE* represents a handle of the open device (similar
to *FILE* pointer for files in *C* for example). The library will find the
right device by the serial number specified via the null-terminated string.

The device's *EEPROM* allows to store a fixed structure that includes various
things like manufacturer, serial number and *VID:PID*. However it also has some
free space if we want to use it for something that we want to store on the
device, though we don't need it right now.

The interface to read and write the fixed part of the *EEPROM* uses data
structure called *FT_PROGRAM_DATA*. What we want to do is to read the current
*FT_PROGRAM_DATA*, update *VID* and *PID* and then write it back. To write the
data back we can use *FT_EE_Program* mentioned above, to read the current
content of *EEPROM* *FT_EE_Read* function can be used:

```c
static int set_device_id(FT_HANDLE handle, unsigned vid, unsigned pid)
{
	FT_STATUS status;
	FT_PROGRAM_DATA data;
	char m[32];
	char mid[16];
	char desc[64];
	char serial[16];

	data.Signature1 = 0x0;
	data.Signature2 = 0xffffffff;
	data.Version = 0x5;
	data.Manufacturer = m;
	data.ManufacturerId = mid;
	data.Description = desc;
	data.SerialNumber = serial;

	status = FT_EE_Read(handle, &data);
	if (!FT_SUCCESS(status))
		return -1;

	data.VendorId = vid;
	data.ProductId = pid;

	status = FT_EE_Program(handle, &data);
	if (!FT_SUCCESS(status))
		return -1;
	return 0;
}
```

Combining the functions together we can override the *VID:PID* for the device.
After that you should unplug and plug the device to see the effects. If
everything is done correctly you should see a few effects:

1. *lsubs* should show the new *VID:PID*
2. *ftdi_sio* and *usbserial* will not be loaded automatically when you plug in
   the device.

# USB Linux Driver

Now we have a device that the kernel does not recognize since it has *VID:PID*, 
that the kernel does not know. So we can teach the kernel to recongize the
device by creating a [USB] driver.

The main structure for a [USB] driver in Linux is
[struct usb_driver.](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.7.8/source/include/linux/usb.h#L1184) There are four fields in that structure that we need to specify:

* *name*
* *probe* function
* *disconnect* function
* *id_table*.

*name* should be unique among the [USB] drivers, but other than that it does not
have any affect on the operation of the driver. *probe* and *disconnect*
functions are called when the device is connected (or detect if we loaded the
module after the device was connected) and disconnected.

We aren't going to implement any hadrware management logic in the driver just
yet. So the most important part of the *usb_driver* structure for us is
*id_table* field.

*id_table* is an array of
[struct usb_device_id.](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.7.8/source/include/linux/mod_devicetable.h#L121)
*usb_device_id* structure is served as a filter of a sort that allows to tell
what kind of devices the driver manages. One specific way we can initialize this
structure is to specify *VID:PID* of the device the driver manages.

Let's take a look at the code. The driver will not manage the hardware in any
way and will just print a message in the log when a device is connected or
disconnected:

```c
// SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0
#include <linux/init.h>
#include <linux/module.h>
#include <linux/usb.h>


#define VENDOR_ID  0x0005
#define PRODUCT_ID 0x0001


static const struct usb_device_id ftdi_id_table[] = {
	{ USB_DEVICE(VENDOR_ID, PRODUCT_ID) },
	{ }
};
MODULE_DEVICE_TABLE(usb, ftdi_id_table);

static int ftdi_usb_probe(struct usb_interface *interface,
			  const struct usb_device_id *id)
{
	(void) interface;
	(void) id;
	pr_alert("Our FTDI-based device has been connected\n");
	return 0;
}

static void ftdi_usb_disconnect(struct usb_interface *interface)
{
	(void) interface;
	pr_alert("Our FTDI-based device has been disconnected\n");
}

static struct usb_driver ftdi_usb_driver = {
	.name = "ftdi_usb",
	.probe = ftdi_usb_probe,
	.disconnect = ftdi_usb_disconnect,
	.id_table = ftdi_id_table,
};

module_usb_driver(ftdi_usb_driver);
MODULE_LICENSE("GPL");
MODULE_DESCRIPTION("FTDI USB-to-serial based something");
MODULE_AUTHOR("Krinkin Mike <krinkin.m.u@gmail.com>");
```

With this module installed in the system you can plug and unplug the device. If
everything is fine you should be able to see some log messages in the `dmesg`
command output:

```
[213829.249938] ftdi: loading out-of-tree module taints kernel.
[213829.250108] ftdi: module verification failed: signature and/or required key missing - tainting kernel
[213829.437515] Our FTDI-based device has been connected
[213829.437649] usbcore: registered new interface driver ftdi_usb
[213835.762120] usb 1-1.4: USB disconnect, device number 15
[213835.762254] Our FTDI-based device has been disconnected
[213841.600851] usb 1-1.4: new high-speed USB device number 16 using xhci_hcd
[213841.729589] usb 1-1.4: New USB device found, idVendor=0005, idProduct=0001
[213841.729595] usb 1-1.4: New USB device strings: Mfr=1, Product=2, SerialNumber=3
[213841.729598] usb 1-1.4: Product: C232HM-DDHSL-0
[213841.729601] usb 1-1.4: Manufacturer: FTDI
[213841.729604] usb 1-1.4: SerialNumber: FT3ELPXS
[213841.732887] Our FTDI-based device has been connected
[213846.514281] usb 1-1.4: USB disconnect, device number 16
[213846.514409] Our FTDI-based device has been disconnected
[214085.963952] usb 1-1: USB disconnect, device number 13
[214085.963958] usb 1-1.1: USB disconnect, device number 14
[214085.993207] usb 2-1: USB disconnect, device number 4
```

# Instead of conclusion

I'm not sure if I can finish this [USB] to [I2C] bridge project given that I
don't have the description of the protocol that FTDI uses, but I've made the
first step.

We've covered in the post basics of the FTDI library and used it to set
*VID:PID*, though it's probably the last time we touched it. However we also
covered a useful tool like *lsusb* along the way and an important concept of
*VID:PID*.

We also created a skeleton of the [USB] driver for our FTDI-based future to
be [USB] to [I2C] bridge. The driver at this point doesn't really do anything
except logging some messages, however it can detect device with our *VID* and
*PID*.
