---
layout: post
title: ARMs PL011 UART on HiKey960 board
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
tags: clang aarch64 qemu uart pl011 hikey960
---

[previous post]: {% post_url 2020-11-29-PL011 %} "the previous post"
[PL011 specification]: https://developer.arm.com/documentation/ddi0183/g/ "PL011 TRM"
[HiKey960]: https://www.96boards.org/product/hikey960/ "HiKey960"
[HiKey960 Hardware User Manual]: https://www.96boards.org/documentation/consumer/hikey/hikey960/hardware-docs/hardware-user-manual.md.html "HiKey960 Hardware User Manual"

In the [previous post] we managed to make PL011 UART controller as emulated by
QEMU work. Emulation is a useful tool, but it's just never going to be perfect.
So naturally I wanted to try it on the real hardware and used [HiKey960] board
that I have and that happen to have a PL011 compatible UART controller.

The sources for this post are available on
[GitHub](https://github.com/krinkinmu/aarch64).

<!--more-->

# Finding the parameters

In the [previous post] we covered that in simple case we basically need to know
two parameters:

 * base memory address where the memory mapped registers of PL011 controller
   are available
 * frequency of the base clock given to the PL011 controller.

For QEMU we found those parameters by looking at the Device Tree dump, so it
makes sense to do the same for the HiKey960 board.

Device Tree for HiKey960 board is available as part of the Linux Kernel source
code (see [arch/arm/arm64/boot/dts/hisilicon/hi3660-hikey960.dts](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.9.12/source/arch/arm64/boot/dts/hisilicon/hi3660-hikey960.dts)).
However Device Tree for the real board is slightly more complicated one than
the one we saw for the QEMU emulated board, so it's hard to find what we want
there. One specific complication is that it has 7 different UARTs there, so
it's not clear which one we need.

Fortunately figuring out that part turned out to be easy. The UART section of
the [HiKey960 Hardware User Manual] explicitly says that the UART that goes
under number 6 is the one we need.

Now in the [arch/arm/arm64/boot/dts/hisilicon/hi3660-hikey960.dts](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.9.12/source/arch/arm64/boot/dts/hisilicon/hi3660-hikey960.dts)
there isn't much information about the UART 6, however we can find more in one
of the included files: [arch/arm64/boot/dts/hisilicon/hi3660.dtsi](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.9.12/source/arch/arm64/boot/dts/hisilicon/hi3660.dtsi).
Specifically, you can find that the base address we need is `0x0xfff32000`:

```
uart6: serial@fff32000 {
	compatible = "arm,pl011", "arm,primecell";
	reg = <0x0 0xfff32000 0x0 0x1000>;
	interrupts = <GIC_SPI 79 IRQ_TYPE_LEVEL_HIGH>;
	clocks = <&crg_ctrl HI3660_CLK_UART6>,
		 <&crg_ctrl HI3660_PCLK>;
	clock-names = "uartclk", "apb_pclk";
	pinctrl-names = "default";
	pinctrl-0 = <&uart6_pmx_func &uart6_cfg_func>;
	status = "disabled";
};
```

What I couldn't find from just looking at the Device Tree is the frequency
of the clock and had to google a little bit for `HI3660_CLK_UART6`. I was a bit
afraid that the clock frequency is also configurable and is not specified
anywhere explicitly. Fortunately, it turned out not to be the case and the
frequency is fixed to [`19200000`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.9.12/source/drivers/clk/hisilicon/clk-hi3660.c#L24).

> *NOTE:* I didn't honestly look at the code to understand if the random number
I found (`19200000`) is the actual frequency I need, but the experiment showed
that it appear to be the case.

# Problems

Here I though that I had everything figured out. After all how badly can I
misconfigure a UART controller? Succesful test in QEMU also gave me a boost of
confidence.

So I went and changed the code:

```c
#include "pl011.h"

void main(void)
{
    struct pl011 serial;

    pl011_setup(
         &serial, /* base_address = */0xfff32000, /* base_clock = */19200000);

    // QEMU PL011 parameters:
    //
    // pl011_setup(
    //     &serial, /* base_address = */0x9000000, /* base_clock = */24000000);

    pl011_send(&serial, "Hello, World\n", sizeof("Hello, World\n"));

    // Hang in there
    while (1) {}
}
```
I built the code, copied the binaries on the device and was ready to move on
after the successful test, but here is what I got trying to load my binary
instead of the expected "Hello World!":

```
Program headers:
p_type: PT_PHDR, p_flags: PF_R, p_offset: 0x40, p_vaddr: 0x200040, p_paddr: 0x20
0040, p_filesz: 0xE0, p_memsz: 0xE0, p_align: 0x8
p_type: PT_LOAD, p_flags: PF_R, p_offset: 0x0, p_vaddr: 0x200000, p_paddr: 0x200
000, p_filesz: 0x12E, p_memsz: 0x12E, p_align: 0x10000
p_type: PT_LOAD, p_flags: PF_X | PF_R, p_offset: 0x130, p_vaddr: 0x210130, p_pad
dr: 0x210130, p_filesz: 0x408, p_memsz: 0x408, p_align: 0x10000
p_type: 0x6474E551, p_flags: PF_W | PF_R, p_offset: 0x0, p_vaddr: 0x0, p_paddr: 
0x0, p_filesz: 0x0, p_memsz: 0x0, p_align: 0x0
Lo
```

So that's definitely not a success. I see that the loader manages to read the
binary and then magically everything stops. How come?

Initially I though that there is something wrong with the loader I use (see
[github.com/krinkinmu/efi](https://github.com/krinkinmu/efi)). After all it's
not like I rigourously tested the code, so it's easy to imagine that a
different ELF binary might have surfaced some problems in the code.

However after poking a bit into the loader code and putting a few debug prints
here and there to understand what's going on I realized that the `Lo` part in
the output above is actually part of the `Loading ELF image...` message. So
it's clear that the problem happens in the middle of outputing the message.

Normally I would suspect the worst here: that I somehow corrupted the memory
somehwere in the code and it only surfaced somewhere deep in the UEFI firmware
internals. However trying to understand at what point the corruption happens
with the debug print didn't point me to any reasonable direction.

At this point I started to suspect that the problem doesn't happen when I make
a particular call, but rather time related instead. So I started adding delays
to the various places in the code like this:

```c
for (volatile int i = 0; i < 1000000000; ++i) {}
```

And what a surprise, I actually managed to make it work and got my "Hello
World":

```c
Program headers:
p_type: PT_PHDR, p_flags: PF_R, p_offset: 0x40, p_vaddr: 0x200040, p_paddr: 0x20
0040, p_filesz: 0xE0, p_memsz: 0xE0, p_align: 0x8
p_type: PT_LOAD, p_flags: PF_R, p_offset: 0x0, p_vaddr: 0x200000, p_paddr: 0x200
000, p_filesz: 0x12E, p_memsz: 0x12E, p_align: 0x10000
p_type: PT_LOAD, p_flags: PF_X | PF_R, p_offset: 0x130, p_vaddr: 0x210130, p_pad
dr: 0x210130, p_filesz: 0x440, p_memsz: 0x440, p_align: 0x10000
p_type: 0x6474E551, p_flags: PF_W | PF_R, p_offset: 0x0, p_vaddr: 0x0, p_paddr: 
0x0, p_filesz: 0x0, p_memsz: 0x0, p_align: 0x0
Loading ELF image...
Loaded ELF image
Starting ELF image...
Hello, World
```

What I found interesting is that to make it work I had to add a delay after the
code that prints "Starting ELF image..." message. That made me think that maybe
the problem is not really in the loader, but rather in the way the loaded code
interracts with the PL011 controller.

The first thing it does is resetting the device to put it into a know state. So
I figured, what if UEFI firmware uses PL011 internal buffers (FIFOs) and doesn't
wait for the data to actually to be sent out. That would certainly explain why
message prints were interrupted half way.

So I went on and modied the `pl011_setup` function slightly to add a wait for
any ongoing transfers to complete before doing a reset when I setup the device:

```c
int pl011_setup(
    struct pl011 *dev, uint64_t base_address, uint64_t base_clock)
{
    dev->base_address = base_address;
    dev->base_clock = base_clock;
    dev->baudrate = 115200;
    dev->data_bits = 8;
    dev->stop_bits = 1;
    wait_tx_complete(dev);
    return pl011_reset(dev);
}

```

And that turned out to also "solve" the problem.

I still don't understand why reset puts the device in the weird state. Reset
indeed should interrupt any ongoing transfers and flush all FIFOs, so that's
not unexpected. What is unexpected is why we cannot see the "Hello World"
message after that.

Maybe reset itself gets stuck or maybe it puts the device in such a state so
it cannot send anything out.

# Instead of conclusion

I cannot claim that I actually solved the problem or just masked it, as I do
not understand the exact mechanism that triggers the problematic behavior.

However I can say that while emulators are useful you should always test you
code on the real hardware.
